Good morning, everyone.
My name is Luke, and I get to serve as the campus pastor at Canexus Aurelia.
Shout out to those of you joining us from Aurelia and joining us online.
And I'd love to lead off this morning by asking you, if you could describe Christmas in one word, what would that word be?
Like when you think of the traditions or the experiences or those things that you're most looking forward to, what would that one word be?
My guess is for some of you here, you'd think of a word like gifts or shopping.
Maybe expensive.
Maybe a word like Turkey comes to mind.
Maybe a name like Santa or Rudolph.
But what would that one word be for you?
My guess is that for many of you in the room, it would kind of lean towards the positive, the happy, the joyful.
But what happens if something
goes really sideways in your Christmas.
What happens if you're reflecting on Christmases that have gone way off the rails?
A bit of a personal confession.
I was a hyper kid, and I can sometimes still be a hyper adult.
I know it doesn't show that much, but it's true.
And what that means is that when you're a hyper person, sometimes unintentionally, you break things.
Not intentionally, but it kind of shatters other people's peace and calm.
And Christmas is a time where people really value that.
Well, when I was about 14 years old, my family got together with some really good family friends for a Christmas dinner.
And it was amazing.
Like you can imagine, you know, the mashed potatoes with the melted butter, just like drizzling all over it, the turkey, the stuffing, just all the best things.
And we'd had this wonderful meal, this really positive time together.
And the table had been cleared and the parents were kind of relaxing sitting in their comfy sweaters and their cozy socks and sipping their hot beverages and just exhaling as you do at the end of a big Christmas event.
And I was upstairs with the boys preparing to play contact football.
What you do after Christmas dinner?
You see, one of my friends had gotten
a football for Christmas.
So obviously, logically, the next thing you do is play contact football inside.
You understand?
So the game starts, he's at quarterback, he drops back, I'm running around, and he fires this pass through the air for me.
It's a great pass, but it's just out of reach.
So I had a decision to make.
There's the responsible option, slow down, miss the pass, don't damage anything or anyone, or
accelerate and dive.
Now, being a self-respecting teenage boy who's competitive, I did the opposite, the obvious thing, I accelerated.
But I didn't accelerate without
Totally thinking about this because see my friend's bed was against the far wall of the room and I was like, I can dive, catch this football, land on the bed, best athletic play of the year.
That's what I do, I accelerate, I dive, I pull in the football, I grab it and I land with a crash with all my weight on my friend's bed and I'm like, man, I wish that was on video, that was stellar.
Except, have you ever tried?
running as fast as you can, jumping as high as you can and landing with all your weight on just kind of like an average, maybe Ikea, double bed.
That thing snapped into that football game one sideways real quick.
In fact, that Christmas gathering, my parents wrapped that up real quick and it was a very quiet car ride home.
And I think if you had pulled the parents aside on that particular day and said, hey, if you could describe this Christmas in one word, what would it be?
Chaotic, unfortunate, expensive?
Like do we get a phrase?
We're putting our son up for adoption.
That's what it's gonna be.
You see, sometimes it just takes one messy, crazy, unscripted event to make a lot of things go sideways.
And for many of you in this room, it's not just Christmas or the Christmas season, but there's been a lot that's gone sideways.
And if I were to say to you, how would you describe Christmas in one word?
You've been so under the gun in work or family responsibilities or circumstances that are just taking it out of you that you just say exhausted.
I'm just
exhausted and this is just one more thing to get through.
Some of you are in a place where last Christmas you had a significant other and things were looking good and you're excited that this relationship might go the distance and then it didn't and something changed and you're dreading Christmas because it's going to be a lonely Christmas and that's your word lonely.
You're going to have to show up at another family function without someone on your arm and deal with great Aunt Gertrude's questions.
But when you're going to get married or something like that, for some of you, between last Christmas and this Christmas, someone you love passed away.
And there's going to be an empty seat at the table for Christmas dinner.
And that is incredibly painful.
And in your word is that it's pain.
I wonder if we could have a real honest conversation what your word would be.
And what's hard is that whether it's somebody being hyperactive and snapping a bed in half like me, or whether it's something you've been living with and caring for a long time, it can take one really hard thing to hijack the whole Christmas season for you, unless God offers you a joy.
that can transform your life and circumstances and sustain you, not just in the Christmas season, but throughout the year.
But if you are going to really understand what that joy is, you need to understand to start the incredible reality of God's good plans for humanity, the good things that He has done for you.
You see, every world religion says, all right, you want to do this?
Here's a list of rules.
Here's what you've got to do.
Here's the things you have to do for God.
But Christmas sets Christianity apart by totally changing that because Christmas starts out by saying, this is what God has done for you.
There's a scholar a guy named Tim Keller, and he's got a great quote on this, what God is doing for us.
He says, Christianity is about God through the form of his son, Jesus, arriving in our world in the form of a fragile human baby.
It's about God ministering to our needs.
It's about God dying for our sins, being buried in a tomb and being raised to life before eyewitnesses.
Christmas is all about starting with what God has done for.
And so in the verses we're looking at today, Mary actually helps us to orient our hearts to this incredible reality what God is doing for humanity.
That he is the wonderful counselor whose plans and purposes are so incredible and so much greater than our own.
That we have so much to gain by opening our lives to him and exactly wants that he wants to do in us and through us.
So Mary's gonna show us what it looks like to be dialed into what God is doing for us.
And also how you can respond to what God has done for you.
A quick recap, remember Mary is a young woman.
She's engaged to be married.
And as Denil spoke about last week, she has an encounter with the angel Gabriel and discovers that not only is there a need for God to send someone to bring hope and rescue into the world, but that God wants to do that through Mary.
And her response is,
What the heck?
She has very real doubts and uncertainties as to what God's plan means for her and for the world.
But she chooses humble surrender and she chooses to serve.
And so today in the verses that we're going to dive into together, we see Mary adopting this posture of joyfully celebrating the wonder of God's counsel, of God's good designs and embracing the joy of his purposes.
So let's dive in looking at verses 46 to 49 of Luke chapter one.
Mary says this.
Have you ever noticed what happens when a woman gets engaged?
Maybe you're that person and you know what it's like to get engaged.
There's a picture they're gonna pop up in a second and it's from my engagement photo shoot with my wife, Emily, and yes, I know what you're thinking.
You're thinking, that guy married up.
And you're right, you're right.
Some people wonder if she's being paid under the table to hang out with me.
I don't know, but it's a win for me, 100%.
But if you ever notice what happens when a woman gets engaged, like her whole life just shifts into high gear.
All right, there's like, who are my bridesmaids gonna be?
Oh, I gotta go dress shopping.
And dress shopping is, man, that's an ordeal.
There's a lot going on, a lot of things to try on.
Dress shopping, centerpieces, invites, wedding colors.
Who's gonna sit with who?
Who can't sit with who?
Who makes the guest list?
Who doesn't make the guest list?
Who has to make the guest list that I wish wouldn't make the guest list?
You get the picture.
Because it's an event that is marked by incredible anticipation and preparation.
Mary,
is no exception.
She's an engaged woman.
She's anticipating and preparing for her wedding day.
She's dreaming of this day.
She's looking forward to marriage to Joseph and building a life with him and having a family with him.
And her life has just been turned upside down.
And this is supposed to be one of the biggest days of her life.
And I can't speak for you, but my guess is,
When you are anticipating and preparing for a big event and something happens that totally compromises that or cancels that, you're not a happy camper.
In fact, maybe that unwanted change of plans brings out the control freakin' you.
It definitely does in me.
And what's crazy about Christmas is that it tends to bring out the control freak in all of us.
Consider for a second,
You're decorating your Christmas tree.
And suddenly you realize that you're that person that has to just have all the ornaments just so or else.
Or it's time to put on Christmas music.
And somebody fires something up and you're like, what is this?
We start with Mariah Carey, baby, all I want for Christmas is you.
We do not deviate from that.
Bing Crosby is next, followed by Carey Underwood.
Then Glee, like you've got it.
Matt felt like, this is how we do this.
Maybe you're a man in the room and you know what it's like to hit December 24th, wake up and say, oh my goodness, not only has my wife got all the gifts for all the people, including all the children and me, I don't have a gift for her.
And suddenly you find yourself in a packed mall with angry, crazy people thinking very un-Christmas thoughts and driving out of a parking lot where you're shouting very un-Christmas things at the other people around you in their vehicles.
You see Christmas brings out the control freak
and all of us.
And maybe if you're honest with yourselves, like, are there any control freaks in the room?
No, don't raise your hands.
Don't raise your hands.
Your family and close friends already know who you are.
And Mary shows us a better way.
You see, control breeds entitlement and our false narratives that we can control the people around us can make it easy to think that you're entitled to certain things.
But Mary lays down control and chooses to open her heart to wonder because entitlement actually kills wonder, but wonder builds and nurtures and fosters joy.
And Mary chooses to say, I am confident that you are doing something good and glorious.
And so I'm opening my life and surrendering
to your plans, they don't all make perfect sense, but you're the wonderful counselor and I can trust your ways.
That opens Mary's life to the joy of what God wants to do in her, for her, and through her.
And when you follow Mary's example and open your life in the same way, you're opening up your life to what God wants to do in you and for you and through you.
And that's why Mary uses language like saying, this is what God has done for me.
She's got zero social standing.
She's from a backwater town.
She's very unknown, and yet God is acting decisively for her.
Now, keep in mind, keep in mind that Mary is not saying perfect exactly what I wanted, unplanned pregnancy.
This is going to boost my social standing.
This is great.
You know, this is going to make my life so much more simple and straightforward.
This is going to be a really straightforward conversation to have with my family or with my fiance.
It's going to be great.
No, she's captivated in her heart and mind with the reality that God is doing something on a cosmic level and she has the joy of playing a central part in that.
When Pastor writes about this and about Mary's response in this moment saying she's been caught up holy and her thinking is convinced her feelings are captivated and her will is gladly surrendered.
Mary marvels that God chooses to use her in part because she has such an awesome view of God.
She says, for the mighty one is holy.
That means he's set apart.
He is supreme.
And one of the challenges for you and I is that sometimes we can think about Jesus as like a homeless puppy kind of on the doorstep of our hearts kind of like scratching at the door wanting to be let in.
And Jesus does become vulnerable and weak and dependent entering this world as a baby to relate to you and your vulnerability and dependence and weakness.
But he is also the creator and king who can inject himself into creation to do exactly what he wants, like a master architect can introduce something new in the design of something they're creating because he's God.
And Mary is rightfully orienting herself and saying, you're God and I'm your servant and you're doing amazing things and you've invited me to be a part of what you're doing.
Thank you.
Thank you, God.
And I wonder in this season, especially looking back on the reality of what has taken place in your life this year, especially with regards to your proximity and involvement here at Kinexis, if somewhere to say, what has God done for you this year?
What comes to mind?
What comes from mind to me is things like 50 people
baptized in the spring saying, I want to live for Jesus and telling stories about healing and heart transformation and overcoming addiction.
It's incredible.
I think of sacred homecoming just a couple months ago, and the life changed so many people experience.
I think, man, what has God done for you?
Because I can see so many ways God has done so much for me.
Mary opens her life to God to receive exactly what
He intends to do for her and through her.
But she continues by having some really compelling insights with regard to what it looks like to respond to and receive what God is doing.
Let me read verses 50 to 53 for you.
Mary says,
He shows mercy from generation to generation to all who fear him.
His mighty arm has done tremendous things.
He has scattered the proud and haughty ones.
He has brought down princes from their thrones and exalted the humble.
He has filled the hungry with good things and sent the rich away with empty hands.
You know, if you think across the board, what was it like to be a Canadian this past year, especially living in Simcoe County?
Would you say it was magnificent
Or did you say it was a bit messy or is even a marathon at times?
Recap the year.
Prime Minister resigns to start.
Strong start.
Wow.
Kind of a polarizing election.
Cost of living, going way up.
Like I never knew Q-tips cost this much.
Rising homelessness and poverty.
AI, threatening job security.
And oh, hey, let's throw in an ice storm just for fun, just for fun.
If anything, this year has taught you that you can't put your confidence in your job, in the economy, in a political leader, even in the predictability of the weather, you need something more.
And Mary is saying, God wants to give you exactly
what you need.
This is why Mary says that he shows his mercy, his kindness, his compassion, his heart, his tenderness, his love from generation to generation to all who fear him.
And you need to catch this because God delights to show his mercy and his power and his love to those who know their need, their need.
for God, their need for His help and who have the humility to open their lives to Him and what He has done.
Because even as Mary talks about the tremendous arm of God and use it as an illustration for God's might and His strength, what she's also touching on is that the arms of God are forming in her womb, arms that will be stretched wide on a cross one day, to overcome sin and death and to bring freedom and life to every person everywhere.
God is doing something incredible in her, and Mary is living proof that when the humble say yes to God, he does incredible things in them and through them and for them.
But you face a very real threat to that reality in your lives that you may not be aware of.
And Mary is focusing our attention on that threat when she says he satisfies the hungry with good things, but he sends the rich away hungry.
You might be like, but what's the deal with that?
The rich aren't going to be hungry.
They're going to McDonald's and grabbing a burger if they need it.
They're fine.
Mary isn't just wanting to give us a dichotomy between those who have and those who have not.
She's reminding you that all people are spiritually hungry, very hungry.
And the rich tend to try to satisfy that hunger.
With more and better, bigger house, nicer car, better image, more social status and followers, more experiences, vacations, what have you.
But those can't satisfy.
Those can't serve the deepest needs of the soul.
You might be here saying, oh, okay, Luke, yeah, fair enough.
I can think of some celebrities in the world's richest 1% who are just always buying the latest and greatest and jetting off to some vacation.
But that's not me.
That's not me.
You know, if you're here and you have more than one outfit, pair of clothes, if you have food in your fridge, if you've got a shelter over your head, if you've got a job to go to,
And if you've got some form of transportation, a bike, a motorbike, a car, maybe a skateboard, you're in the world's 10 to 20 richest percent that at least 80% of the world don't have every single one of those things.
And Mary is saying, be careful because if you come to God saying, hey, look at what I've done.
Look at my academic credentials.
Look at my career success.
Look at my online followers.
Look at my bank account.
Look what I've got.
Also, if you could help me with this, that'd be great.
You're gonna go away dissatisfied.
But if you have the same posture as the world's poor who can't distract themselves from their need with more and better staff, who can't just buy what they want whenever they want it,
It's called Amazon Prime.
You come before God and you say, God, this is my need and only you can fill it.
Only you can heal my broken heart.
Only you can forgive me from the grateful things I've done.
Only you can show me the wise way forward as the wise counselor.
And only you can bring freedom and new life.
And I open my hands to receive exactly what you are and what you are doing in me.
Me, we are the rich.
And yet joy is found through opening our lives in need to what God alone can do.
It's amazing because so often when you think of world leaders and those who are wealthy or powerful, you think of all they gain and acquire and accomplish with their wealth.
And yet Jesus invites us into a radically different way.
Listen to this quote on how Jesus responds to power.
It says power behaving humbly doesn't have much of a history.
Humility wasn't even considered a virtue in the Roman world.
Humility was a sign of weakness, not strength.
And Caesar wielded his power to lord over, not serve under.
Jesus warned his disciples about this type of leadership.
And he also said that one will recognize the great leaders because with their power, they choose to serve.
Kingdom leaders exercise power to advance the flourishing
of the least of these rather than exploited for self-indulgence.
And so when you follow Mary's example, trusting in a good God who lays down power to become weak to meet you in your need, you step into and open your life to the amazing because of what he choose to do in and through people who know their need and humble themselves before God.
Lastly, in verses 54 and 55, Mary doubles down on celebrating what God is doing through Jesus for humanity, for the whole world.
She says this, he's helped his servant Israel and remembered to be merciful, for he made this promise to our ancestors to Abraham and his children forever.
You're like, last time I heard the Christmas story, Abraham was not involved.
What's the deal with that?
Well, in Genesis 22,
God makes a promise to Abraham that through him, through his future generations, all of humanity will be blessed.
And Mary connects the dots that Jesus is the fulfillment of that promise.
But Abraham had to say yes to God.
He knew God was doing something for him, but it meant that for God to do something through him, it meant surrender.
And so Abraham says, God, where do you want me to do?
What do you want me to go?
And God has him leave his country and his community and all he's ever known and set out in obedience to God, even though the final destination isn't totally clear, it's costly.
So in Hebrews, it says, so Abraham, when called by God to go to a land that he would inherit, obeyed and went, even though he didn't know where he was going, takes a step of faith and risk in following God.
And Mary makes this connection that not only is the promise fulfilled in Jesus, but that she's in the same boat, that if she says yes to surrender to God's call on her life, it's gonna cost her.
I mean, think about it.
Think about it and engage woman, Mary, going to Joseph saying, hey, wedding plans coming great.
Hope you're doing well.
BT Dubs, I'm pregnant.
Also, what do you think about this as a centerpiece?
Joseph's gonna be like, time out.
It's not gonna be hard, absolutely.
In a cultural context, we're getting pregnant outside of marriage was shameful.
Is she gonna be shamed?
Yes.
When people ask her what happens and she says, I had the supernatural encounter with an angel, told me I'm gonna be pregnant with God's son, here we are.
They're gonna say, you are out of your mind.
She's gonna be misunderstood.
And she's gonna watch her son, Jesus,
go to a torturous, torturous premature death on the cross.
It's gonna cost her.
And yet, Mary today is probably the most famous woman in history.
I don't know if anyone else that you know of on a first name basis that lived 2000 years ago, because she said, yes, God, I wanna receive what you're doing for me, and I wanna surrender to what you're doing through me.
You see, surrender to God is costly, but never wasted.
Surrender to God is costly, but never wasted.
At the start of this message, I ask you if you could describe Christmas using one word, what would that word be?
And my hope is that in light of what Jesus is doing for you and coming into this world at Christmas, it would be joy.
And what I would love for you to do is to open your life to receive that joy by opening your life to Him.
You know, for many of you in this room, you are invited in this moment to say yes to Jesus.
Jesus, I need you.
Jesus, I'm spiritually hungry and only you can satisfy.
Jesus, I believe that you became weak to make me strong.
I believe that you entered into the hopelessness of my world and my circumstances to give me hope in a future.
Jesus, I believe that you are willing to be hated and despised to invite me into a relationship of being known and loved.
Jesus, I believe that you went to the cross and were killed for the sin of the world so that I might have forgiveness over the things that I most deeply regret in my life and have lasting life in you.
In Jesus, I open my life to receive you.
And if you're in a place where you've said, I've made that decision, my hope would be that in this Christmas season, you would take the step to rest.
You would take the step to embrace with gratitude every good and perfect gift that is available to you because everything good is from God to open your life and receive the good things that God Himself wants to give you in Jesus.
receive what God has done for you.
But the second thing I want to encourage you to act on is to invest what God has done in you through you to others.
You know, so often joy is waiting for you on the far side of surrender and sacrifice.
And there's dozens of ways I could communicate this to you, but I want to share it with you through the reality of what it's like for a woman to be pregnant, which clearly I have no experience with.
But if you're in this room and you're a mom, you know what it's like to surrender your body to life forming inside you.
And that little life starts to take over.
The first three months, you're a puke in every day.
The last three months, you're getting up every few minutes at night to go pee.
Like this little one takes over and there are activities that you lose out on and things that you can't eat and all kinds of sacrifices you make.
And then you deliver that baby like wowsers
like I salute you, surrender, sacrifice, and what happens?
We plan that.
And what happens when that doctor in that delivery room hands you your baby?
Joy, incredible joy.
So my invitation to you
is to receive this Christmas, what Jesus has done for you.
And then to invest what God wants to do through you.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you that you are the wonderful counselor whose plan to save humanity is bigger and better than we could have created on our own.
Thank you for Mary who gets it.
and who celebrates what you've done for her, what you've done for the humble and the needy, what you've done for all of humanity, that all people everywhere might receive the gift of a new life in Jesus' name.
And God, today, for everyone present, I would ask that you give every person the courage to open their lives and say, Jesus, I want you.
I want what you have for me.
I want the joy
that you give in the season that is indestructible.
And Jesus, I wanna out of that gift, I wanna be a person who invests in the lives of others, who pours out of the joy that you've filled my life with.
Thank you for everything that you're doing, for everything that you've done.
Help us now as we celebrate to be a people who build our lives on the wonder, the goodness, the love of who you are.